During his first imprisonment in Rome
from about 59 to 61 C.E.,
the apostle Paul was permitted
to stay in his own hired house,
though he was constantly
guarded by a soldier.
During those two years,
he preached to everyone who came to him
and he wrote inspired letters
to the Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Philemon,
and evidently Hebrews too.
And then Paul was apparently released.
Now he could renew his missionary activity.
He could write to Timothy,
who was serving in Ephesus,
and to Titus, who was serving on Crete.
Soon, though, Roman Emperor Nero
reportedly blamed Christians
for the fire that destroyed much of Rome,
and once again Paul found himself in chains.
After decades of faithful Christian service
(the year was 65 C.E.),
how did Paul feel?
We get our answer by reading
from his second letter to Timothy,
which he wrote from prison.
Turn, please, to 2 Timothy chapter 4.
Did the men
who apprehended Paul carry swords?
No doubt.
Did seeing those swords remind Paul
how King Herod Agrippa I had executed James,
the brother of John, by sword?
We can only imagine.
But from this excerpt from 2 Timothy,
we see that Paul sensed
that his own execution was imminent.
And we also see something else.
Here we see the three things
that strengthened Paul
as he faced execution.
Please read with me 2 Timothy 4:6-8:
“For I am already being
poured out like a drink offering,
and the time for my releasing is imminent,”
that is to say, his death,
which would allow
for his eventual resurrection
to Christ’s heavenly Kingdom.
And verse 7 continues:
“I have fought the fine fight,
I have run the race to the finish.”
“The finish”—yes, Paul sensed
that he was approaching
a triumphant end to his personal race.
He continues:
“I have observed the faith.
“From this time on, there is reserved for me
the crown of righteousness.”
And here we see Paul’s strong hope.
And he continues:
“Which the Lord, the righteous judge,
will give me as a reward in that day.”
Can you see Paul’s strong relationship
with Jehovah in this expression?
his unflagging confidence that God’s Son
would bestow the promised reward?
And then he says:
“Yet not to me only,
but also to all those
who have loved his manifestation.”
Paul loved his Christian brothers,
and he didn’t forget them.
That’s how Paul was able to rejoice
despite the threat of death
—his brothers, his relationship
with Jehovah, and his hope.
It’s not that Paul wanted to die.
Of course he would have preferred
to live on and keep serving Jehovah
together with his
Christian brothers and sisters.
Yet, he faced death with courage,
and he rejoiced in the reward
that he knew was reserved for him.
Well, like Paul, we too
can rejoice despite the threat of death.
How so?
Let’s go back
to our theme text at Romans 8:35.
What is the answer
to the two questions Paul poses here,
namely: “Who will separate us
from the love of the Christ?
“Will tribulation or distress or persecution
or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?”
The answer is found in verses 38 and 39:
“For I am convinced that neither death
“nor life nor angels nor governments
“nor things now here nor things to come
nor powers nor height nor depth
“nor any other creation will be able
“[yes, death is not able] to separate us
from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
A temporary pause in the grave
cannot extinguish Jehovah’s love
for his servants.
Does Jehovah still love
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
How about Sarah, Rebekah,
Job, Moses, Daniel?
What about all those
who have died in prisons,
in concentration camps
on account of their strong faith?
Does Jehovah still love them?
Of course he does.
And he still loves the hundreds
of brothers and sisters
who have died in recent months
as a result of COVID-19.
He still loves your grandma,
your dad, your sister.
He keeps them in his memory.
He’ll call them back to life.
And this fact helps us,
dear friends, when we face
the threat of death by sword as Paul did.
Now, as you watch the following video,
note which specific provisions
from Jehovah helped
our Brother Baite Michael Dugbe
to rejoice despite
facing the threat of death.
When everything falls apart
and when everything
around you is chaotic,
the one thing you have
is your relationship with Jehovah.
My name is Baite Michael Dugbe.
I was born in Monrovia, Liberia in 1980.
Growing up in Monrovia
before the war was an amazing time.
I had wonderful parents.
We grew up in a nice house,
and we went to a great school.
When I was nine years old,
everything changed overnight.
There were reports of rebels
trying to take over the government.
Those reports alone
made people panic.
Businesses started to close down.
Services were shut down
—the lights, the power, the water—
everything stopped.
The next few years were really unstable.
In 1996, things again fell apart completely.
It was all-out war.
This time, the rebels were in the city.
There was a lot of looting going on.
There was a lot of shooting.
The rebels—they were known for torture
if people would not agree to fight with them.
In a situation like that,
there’s a lot of fear;
there’s a lot of panic.
And when your fear level rises,
the best way to deal with it is prayer
—prayer to Jehovah,
asking him specifically for direction
on what to do next.
As the fighting escalated
and it got closer to where we lived,
it was no longer safe.
We had to flee,
and we ended up at the branch office.
The brothers were very loving;
they took really good care of us.
Our spiritual activities
—they made sure we kept up with that.
Looking back,
I’m very grateful to have survived.
Two things helped us get through.
Number one:
our relationship with Jehovah.
That’s the only thing that keeps you stable.
But then, also, we were able to survive
because of the help
from the brothers and sisters.
Those moments of trial
—that’s when you really realize
how much you need the brotherhood.
I have a lot of joy
in my assignment at Bethel
in Audio/Video Services.
I love the brothers and sisters
that I work with.
It’s all thanks to Jehovah
that I am alive and that I get
to serve him every day.
This video reminds us that life
in this system of things is fragile.
But did you notice what helped Brother Dugbe
to rejoice despite the threat of death?
It was his relationship with Jehovah.
And it was his Christian brothers
who helped him to keep his hope alive
through regular study,
meetings, and preaching.
Is it possible that some of us
will have to die for our faith
as many early Christians did
and as some
modern-day Witnesses have done?
Yes.
We’re not guaranteed
a trouble-free existence
in this system of things.
And there’s the very real possibility
that we may die by illness,
accident, or the other ravages
of these last days.
We might die before the new world comes,
as many of our dear friends already have.
Or we may be spared alive
through the great tribulation.
Either way, we need to be determined
to remain faithful to Jehovah
right down to the end.
“The one who has endured
to the end will be saved.”
If we assume that the new world
will arrive before we die,
we may be unprepared
to remain loyal to the death if necessary.
Similarly, if we assume
that the great tribulation will not come
in our lifetime,
we will be unprepared for its hardships.
The only way to be prepared
for either eventuality
is to stay spiritually strong and alert.
“Keep on the watch, therefore,” Jesus said,
“because you do not know
on what day your Lord is coming.”
It’s been good
for us to consider more closely
the apostle Paul’s strong conviction
as expressed at Romans 8:35.
What have we learned from this symposium?
We’ve seen how Romans 8:35-39
assure us that no trial of any sort
will cause Jehovah to stop loving us.
Knowing that we have Jehovah’s approval
and love even while under trial
is a key to rejoicing despite tribulation,
distress, persecution, hunger,
nakedness, danger, sword, or anything else.
Therefore, continue to draw closer
to the One who loves you so very much.
Strengthen your trust in Jehovah
through personal study and prayer.
Keep assuring your heart of his love.
Treasure our precious brotherhood,
and draw closer to one another.
Cherish your God-given hope,
and meditate on “the real life” yet ahead.
And finally, remember the inspired prayer
found at Colossians 1:11.
If we continue doing these things,
dear friends, then, like Paul,
we will be able to rejoice
despite trials of any sort.
Notice these encouraging words
found at Colossians 1:11:
“And may you be strengthened
“with all power
according to his glorious might.”
Now, just how much power is there
“according to [God’s] glorious might”?
We don’t have to imagine
because his Word reveals what Jehovah
has accomplished and will yet accomplish
by means of his holy spirit
—the most powerful force there is.
And for what purpose will he grant you this?
Not simply so that you may endure,
not merely so that you may endure fully,
not only so that you may
endure fully with patience,
but as it says:
“So that you may endure fully
with patience and joy.”
And with that assurance,
we can endure despite any trial
no matter how difficult it is,
no matter how long it lasts
because our Father’s unfailing love
will enable us to rejoice
both for all eternity and always.